
# project 3 introduction

Each project asks you to understand and reproduce someone else’s
research, and in some cases, extend that work to incorporate more recent
data.

## tasks

Read the brief descriptions below and individually rank each project
using a 3-point scale:

1.  I would prefer not to work on this project
2.  I don’t mind working on this project
3.  I would love working on this project

Once I’ve assigned partners, meet with your partner and discuss each
others’ preferences, and report to me your joint rankings.

## abstracts

**Excel 2015.** Is it safe to use Microsoft Excel 2015?

In 2008, researchers B.D. McCullough and David Heiser published a paper
documenting that “Excel 2007, like its predecessors, fails a standard
set of intermediate-level accuracy tests in three areas: statistical
distributions, random number generation, and estimation.” In this
project I want you to update this analysis, apply the intermediate tests
they describe to Excel 2015 and R and compare the results. [Read the
paper.](http://www.pucrs.br/famat/viali/tic_literatura/artigos/planilhas/McHe08.pdf)

**Global population.** How is the global population changing?

The [Gapminder project](https://www.gapminder.org/data/) provides data
by country for all sorts of population dynamics, for example, fertility,
life expectancy, GDP per capita, etc. There are many research questions
that could be investigated using these data. For example, Hans Rosling
developed visualization of life expectancy as a function of fertility
rate, with data markers indicating population size, and the whole thing
changing over time. [See Hans’ TED
talk.](https://www.ted.com/talks/hans_rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen?language=en#t-30140)
Can you reproduce Hans’ work in static images? Or address some other
question with the Gapminder data?

**Income inequality.** Does mortality increase with rising inequality of
income?

In 2000, researchers found that Canadian provinces and metropolitan
areas generally had both lower income inequality and lower mortality
than US states and metropolitan areas. In this project, I would like you
to reproduce their analysis and findings and bring the results up to
date by acquiring data from 2000-2010. [Read the
paper.](http://www.bmj.com/content/320/7239/898?query=rft.jtitle%25253DJ%252BGerontol%2526rft_id%25253Dinfo%25253Apmid%25252F8315241%2526rft.genre%25253Darticle%2526rft_val_fmt%25253Dinfo%25253Aofi%25252Ffmt%25253Akev%25253Amtx%25253Ajournal%2526ctx_ver%25253DZ39.88-2004%2526url_ver%25253DZ39.88-2004%2526url_ctx_fmt%25253Dinfo%25253Aofi%25252Ffmt%25253Akev%25253Amtx%25253Actx)

**Protein ID.** Identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry.

A statistical model is presented for computing probabilities that
proteins are present in a sample on the basis of peptides assigned to
tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra acquired from a proteolytic digest of the
sample. In this project, I ask you to reproduce this work using the
[assignment and
data](http://noble.gs.washington.edu/~wnoble/genome541/prophet/) by
Prof. William Stafford Noble at the Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington. [Read the
paper.](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac0341261)

**Spending trends.** Is consumer spending affected by housing prices or
stock market performance?

Using data from 1975-2012, researchers found that US households increase
their spending when house prices rise, but not when house prices fall.
In this project, I would like you to reproduce their analysis and
findings. How do these results inform our understanding of the
consequences of the 2008 financial crisis? [Read a summary
here](http://www.nber.org/papers/w18667) and [read the paper
here.](http://www.nber.org/papers/w18667.pdf) For a big-picture view of
the causes and effects of the 2008 financial crisis, read [Paul
Krugman’s article
here](http://faculty.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/kdsalyer/LECTURES/Ecn200e/krugman_macro.pdf).

**Voting machines.** How trustworthy are electronic voting systems in
the US?

Beth Clarkson, a professor of statistics at Wichita State University,
has analyzed election returns in Kansas, Ohio, and Wisconsin over
several elections and found patterns that indicate votes are being
manipulated in the voting machines. Her assessment is that “the data
reveals multiple (at least two) agents working independently to
successfully alter voting results.” In this project, I want you to
obtain precinct-level voting data from a different state and reproduce
her analysis. [Read the
paper.](https://www.statslife.org.uk/significance/politics/2288-how-trustworthy-are-electronic-voting-systems-in-the-us)

<!-- **ACA.** What impact has the Affordable Care Act (ACA) had on people's lives?  -->

<!-- Data from the US government on enrollments, age, income level, and so forth of folks who have enrolled in ACA programs (commonly called "Obama-care") should be able to tell us to what extent the ACA has had a positive (or negative) impact on people's lives, allowing us to cut through the propaganda we hear in the media.  -->

<!-- **PE license.** Does licensing protect the public?  -->

<!-- Obtaining a license as a Professional Engineer (PE) is required if you want to open an engineering practice of your own. The National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) claims that requiring engineering firms to employ licensed PEs protects the public health, safety, and welfare. But does it? Legislatures in every state have passed laws exempting big corporate engineering firms such as BP, GM, Halliburton, and Bechtel from the requirement to employ PEs. So I have to be licensed to sign off on an air-conditioning system design for a new residential house, but not for drilling for oil three miles below the surface of the Gulf of Mexico from the Deepwater Horizon. So what do the data tell us about the efficacy of our current state-by-state licensing policies? Does licensing benefit the public?  -->

<!-- **RHIT grades.** Do grades predict anything?  -->

<!-- Using data from the Rose-Hulman Registrar's office, we can ask questions such as, "Does a student's grade in a prerequisite have any predictive value for their grade in the follow-on course?" With registrar's data there are quite a number of hypotheses you might consider.   -->

<!-- **STEM shortage.** Is there really a shortage of STEM workers?  -->

<!-- For years now, we've been told that the US has a shortage of workers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Do the data support this assertion, or is this corporate propaganda? Do companies want an increase in the number of educated workers to increase competition among workers to drive down costs (salaries, benefits, especially health care)? Or are we really facing a crisis? -->

<!-- **Trade.** How important are international trade deals to the average citizen?  -->

<!-- In this election cycle, we've heard a lot of rhetoric about the effects of trade agreements such as NAFTA and the TPP. What are the actual, evidence-based effects? How does the trade deal affect the citizens of trading partners such as Mexico, for example? Do trade agreements only benefit the biggest corporations?  -->

<!-- **US census.** How is the American population changing?  -->

<!-- US Census data is freely available from the US Government. What do the data tell us about the changing demographics of the country by region, age, sex, race/ethnicity, rural/urban, etc? What have the most noticeable changes been from 1960 to 2010?  -->

-----

[main page](../README.md)
